A few people asked me how to tell whether a reed that has gone flat can be retuned, or whether it should be replaced. Well, (as always) experience is probably the best teacher, but there are a few tips I can give. If a reed suddenly drops in pitch by a large amount, it has probably succumbed to metal fatigue. Try plucking the reed - a healthy reed should produce a 
bright ringing sound. Lift the tip of the reed away from the plate and look closely at the top surface of the reed - you may be able to spot a tiny crack where the metal has broken, even though the reed might still sound when you play it. Another tell-tale sign of metal fatigue is when the reed plays at one pitch under normal playing pressure, but then becomes very sharp when you play it very softly.

This leads us inevitably towards the subject of reed replacement. Well, the easiest thing for me to say would be to buy one of the various reed replacement kits that are available and follow the instructions that are included with it. If, however, you want to go it alone, then all you need are a jeweller's hammer and a small punch. I use a pin punch with a 1/16" tip that I have ground down to around 1mm. To remove the dead reed, you need to support as much of the reed plate as possible, without obstructing the reed you wish to remove. (I use an small anvil that I have made specially  for this purpose, 
but you can improvise something quiet easily. I used an old comb from a Suzuki ProMaster for a while with some success.) Now place the tip of the punch against the end of the rivet and with one sharp tap with the hammer, it should come free. Easy, huh??? Of course, as with anything, it takes a little practice to make it perfect - remember the first time you tried to bend a note?!

Now you will need a replacement reed. Repeat the above process on a reed of the same length and pitch from another reedplate. With a little luck, the reed should come off with the rivet still in place - if not, you may have to crawl around on the floor looking for the rivet! Alternatively, you may choose to use a replacement rivet (you may be able to find a hobby supplier who stocks something appropriate). It is now simply a case of placing the reed into the reedplate and squeezing the rivet into place with a pair of pliers, or tapping the head of the rivet firmly with the hammer, whilst 
supporting the reedplate against something solid. Again, this may be tricky at first, but it will get easier with practice.

If you do decide to use a reed replacement kit, then you may choose to replace the rivets with nuts and bolts or screws. This may make it easier the next time you have to replace this reed. However, I must admit that I prefer to use rivets most of the time. There is an item of repair lore that claims whatever clamps the reed pad down (the rivet head, or the nut or head of a bolt) should have as small a diameter as possible for best reed response. I don't buy this at all. Providing the reed is firmly clamped to the reedplate, I really don't think it make any difference. In fact I use a large headed rivet as it makes it easier to clamp the reed down securely. I have yet to have a customer complain that reeds I have replaced sound or respond differently to the other reeds. I also believe that tempting as bolted-on reeds are, rivets do a much better job of fixing them than nuts/bolts or screws. I buy broad-headed MS-type rivets by the thousand. The only exceptions would be for harps with odd plate thicknesses - I may then consider nuts and bolts, if I don't have suitable rivets.

What follows is purely my opinion - and that opinion is based on having to replace dozens of reeds per week, efficiently enough to earn a living by doing it, without having to charge ridiculous prices. If I only had to replace the occasional reed now and again, I might think differently.

First of all, when you are experienced, replacing a reed with a rivet takes a few seconds. To replace one with a nut/bolt or screw takes a few minutes. With a rivet, you merely tap out the old rivet, line up the new reed, tap in a new rivet, then adjust the reed (if necessary). With a screw, you have to tap out the old rivet, prepare the hole in the reedplate, prepare the hole in the reed, line up the reed, screw or bolt it down, adjust it, tighten it, adjust it again, tighten it again, adjust it again, etc. I can probably rivet ten reeds in the time it takes me to bolt or screw a single reed.

Secondly, tiny nuts, bolts and screws cost more than rivets, even if you buy them by the thousand. I have also yet to find a screw of bolt with a nice broad head like my favorite rivets. Nuts and bolts also give you one more tiny item to drop on the floor.

The above are mostly economical reasons, based on doing this for a living. There are also some more basic reasons. I have often had to replace reeds that had been previously replaced and in many cases, this was not too well done - the commonest problem is that the heel of the reed is not perfectly flat to the reedplate. In order for a reed to work nicely, it needs to be firmly clamped to the plate and to do this with a screw, you have to turn it to tighten it. As I hinted above, this tends to misalign the reed. Readjusting the reed tends to loosen the screw - and if you're not very careful, it's very easy to strip the thread if you are screwing directly into the reedplate. Nuts and bolts don't suffer from this as badly, but as 
rivets concentrate the pressure perpendicularly, they don't suffer from it at all. In fact, nine times out of ten, I can rivet a reed without any need for further lateral adjustment, but I guess I have had a fair bit of 
practice!

If you use a small headed rivet, it is very easy to apply too much pressure, causing the heel of the reed to dip in the middle and rise up at the edges. It doesn't take much if this to introduce major leakage at the base of the reed and all around poor response. A broad headed rivet applies the pressure more evenly, preventing this from happening. One problem that occurs when you cannibalise reeds from another reedplate is that the heel of the reed gets "domed" when you punch it out. It's best to hammer (gently!) the heel flat to get rid of this, but this is not necessary if you use a good broad 
rivet, as it tends to happen automatically as part of the riveting process. It also seems to me that the more mass you have behind the fulcrum of the reed, the less energy will be wasted as the reed vibrates. I believe this is the case with the lamellae of kalimbas and the like and I suspect it applies to the reeds of harmonicas. I've tried both screws and nuts/bolts, but I remain firmly convinced that a well-placed rivet does the job much better. About the only advantage of screws or nuts and bolts that comes to mind, is the ability to change reeds outside of the workshop. Even so, you would have to make sure that you carried reeds of the appropriate pitch (although if you are a blues harp player who always blows out the same reeds each time, that would reduce the number of reeds you would have to carry) and you still have to retune them after replacement, so I'm not sure you could do it in between numbers on stage, like a guitarist can change strings.

It would seem that the broad headed rivets that I prefer can be somewhat hard to come by in the US, but if you only need a few, you can make them yourself. This is a quick and dirty method based on a much neater method Vern Smith suggested to me some years back and I use it from time to time if I need a rivet that is wider or longer than the ones I have on hand.

Get yourself some steel rod of about 3/32" diameter. Cut off a piece maybe 3/8" long. Place it in your Dremel (or equivalent tool) so that the part that protrudes from the chuck is slightly longer than the required length of the shaft of the rivet. Now get a jeweller's file with a flat side and one smooth edge. Spin the rod holding the smooth edge of the file against the chuck and face of the file flat against the rod, trying to reduce the diameter of the rod as evenly as possible. Check your progress often and stop when the exposed bit of the rod is just narrow enough to fit the rivet hole of the reedplate. Remove the rod from the drill, the place the thinned end of the rod into the chuck. Cut off the thicker bit of the rod leaving you with a head maybe 1/16" thick. Spin the drill again and this time use the file flat against the end of the rod, until you have a nice flat head for your rivet. 

Voila! One rivet made to your personal specifications.

Whatever method of reed replacement you choose, make sure that the reed is perfectly centred in the slot. If it isn't, try holding the reedplate up to the light and pushing the reed (gently!) into the slot - you should be able to see if the reed is catching on one side of the slot, or the other. Check to seem that the heel of the reed is flat against the plate and firmly fixed. Look along the length of the reed to make sure that there are no gaps along the sides and that the reed isn't bent. Also, look at the tip of the reed - it should be parallel to the reed plate. Again, a healthy reed that is well 
riveted, should give a bright ringing sound when you pluck it. 

As always, practise your reed replacement skills on an old harp first!

Sometimes there are problems getting the reeds to fit properly, even though the replacement in supposedly identical to the reed that needs to be replaced. Sometimes the new reed will lie diagonally in the slot, or it may be a faction short, or a fraction too long. In all of these cases, the remedy is quite simple - enlarge the rivet hole in the heel of the 
replacement reed. If the reed is a little short, then take off a little from the rivet hole towards the back of the heel. If the reed is  too long, then remove some from the towards the font of the hole. Similarly, removing some material from either side of the hole allows the reed to be moved from left to right. In all cases, you should only need to remove a small amount in order to be able to get the reed to sit perfectly above the slot.

Obviously, it is best to replace a defective reed with a reed which is identical. However, in some cases this is simply not possible. If you regularly wear out the same reed on each of your harps, eventually you will end up with a box full of old reedplates, all missing the same reed! Thankfully, it is possible to adapt reeds to fit different slot sizes.

You can cut a longer reed to length by scoring the end of the reed and breaking it off, then tidying up the tip of the reed with a file. It's probably best to do the final fitting with the reed riveted in place, to make sure that you do not trim it too short. Bear in mind that with some harps, the lower pitched reeds are not just longer, they are often wider too. A wider reed can be reshaped carefully with abrasives. Check your progress regularly, so you don't overdo it, holding the reedplate up to the light and checking the clearance around the reed.

If you need to fit a short reed into a long slot, or a narrow reed into a wide slot, then there is not much you can do to the reed itself, but thankfully, there are a few things you can do to the slot. If you need to use a reed of a certain pitch which is substantially shorter than the slot where you would live to place it, then it is possible to shorten the slot using either solder or epoxy putty. Fill the end of the slot a little further than you need, then file away the excess until the reed fits nicely. This is quite demanding and I would try to avoid it unless there is no other option. 

If the reed is a little narrower than the slot, then there are a couple of methods that can be used to draw in the edges of the slot. These techniques seem to have acquired the names "embossing" and "burnishing". Personally, I don't think either of these terms are very accurate descriptions and I tend to prefer the word "sizing" to cover the general topic of getting reed and slots to match each other optimally. 

The commonest trick for narrowing the slot is to rub the upper surface of the slot with a smooth rounded tool, causing the brass to bulge inwards slightly, reducing the gap along the edge of the reed. Dick Gardner uses a tuning fork that has a rounded end to the shaft, others favour the rounded surface of a socket wrench. I use a tool that I made myself, which is 
essentially a hemispherical piece of brass mounted on a pencil like handle. The important thing is that the business end of the tool is hard, but smooth and has a radius of between 1/4" to 3/4". Whatever tool you use, make sure the reedplate is well supported, then carefully, but firmly stroke back and forth along the length of the reed. The reed should dip downwards out of the way as the tool pushes against the edges of the slot. As always, check your progress frequently by holding it up to the light. If the reed starts to catch on one side of the slot, you can often free it by centering the reed again. If this doesn't free the reed, then you can remove a little bit of the edge of the slot using a fine abrasive, or by scraping it with a sharp craft knife. Even on reeds that haven't been replaced, this technique can vastly improve the reed's performance by minimising wastage of air, but be warned - you will need to do some pretty serious regapping of the reed afterwards. Also, such a drastic alteration of the adjustment of the reed will probably mean that some degree of retuning is needed afterwards. 

One limitation of the above technique is that it can be hard to work right down towards the fixed end of the reed, where leakage is often more of a problem. One method of drawing in the edges of the slot near the base of the reed is to use a sharp tool to scratch a channel parallel to the edge of the reed, pushing a small furrow of brass in towards the slot. I've had success using a tungsten carbide engraving pencil, as well as with various sharp dental tools. The reed needs to be supported as though you were about to tune it, then it is simply a case of drawing the scribing tool along the edge of 
the lower 1/4 or 1/3 of the reed tongue. As always, go slowly and check your progress often. If you overdo it with this technique, it is a little harder to free the reed from any burrs on the edge of the slot. Some hobby shops sell ultra-high grit abrasive films that are ideal for cleaning up the edges of the slots, or you can pick up something called interproximal strips from a dental supplier - these are a thin single-sided abrasive ideal for this task.

All of the above techniques are pretty simple to describe, but you can spend quite a bit of time refining your skills with them. Bear in mind at all times: "It ain't what you do, it's the way that you do it!"


